I’ve recently become interested in investigating the crossover between human behavior and financial markets. Not really through headlines or sentiment, but limit order books. I constructed a Poisson-driven limit order book simulator that was iterated on a few times to track the idea of response to market movement and event-driven situations. The multi-variable simulation allows price to evolve endogenously based on imbalances in queue sizes.

In the first iteration of the project, the order book and its initial sizes were given by constant values, and would periodically update based on a events arriving according to Poisson processes with intensity λ, approximated in discrete time via probabilities λ·Δt. Bid and ask queues were initialized at fixed depths, then evolved stochastically, along with having a one-level pricing scheme. While this model would only change the size of the queue for bids and asks, the consideration of when a bid/ask queue was exhausted is what drives this model. The bid and ask price would move one tick together, either up or down depending on whether bids or asks ran out first, before refreshing said bid/ask count to its initial value. This is what drove the simulation in its early stages, and while not completely accurate, demonstrates generally how markets respond to imbalances in an order book. This iteration can be seen in the first image attached below.

In the second iteration, I introduced a market-making bot that would directly interact with the order book, taking on quotes at the best bid and ask prices, earning the spread when it was filled by incoming market orders. Therefore, I can track the inventory, cash, and mark-to-market wealth with respect to time (as seen in the second image attached below). With the introduction of this bot, we highlight a new key tradeoff: inventory risk. As the agent builds positions in response to the stochastic order flow, unforeseen price movements can offset what the model initially calculated for the gain, leading to realistic swings in total wealth. This extension changes the program from an isolated, evolving market into an interactive system, making it possible to study how different forms of execution, risk management, and market volatility affect profitability in a microstructure-driven environment.

In the third iteration of this project, I built in an inventory-aware scheming mechanism for our market maker. It was governed by a risk-adversion parameter, gamma. Rather than quoting symmetrically around the midpoint price, it would adjust quotes based on a simplified reservation price equation, r = S - yq, where S is the midpoint price, y is the risk aversion constant, and q is the current inventory. As y grows, the market maker becomes more aggressive in mean-reversing the inventory at the cost of fewer fills. The model runs 6 different values of y to simulate different risk aversion strategies under the same seed. Smaller y would see larger inventory swings, while smaller y kept inventory tight but often saw price-outs. Running this over multiple seeds demonstrated that no one strategy was great, and capturing spread required accepting inventory risk, and risking this hedge will determine your stability and opportunity cost.

In the final iteration of the project (thus far), I replaced the fixed fill probability with a quote-dependent execution model, which rewarded better quotes by having a higher likelihood of filling them. This was done through a logistic model that was dependent on two variables. One was delta, the difference between market’s best quote price and the market maker’s quote price. The other was k which controls how sensitive fill probability is to quote aggressiveness. I have this as a constant value of 2, but can be varied depending on the type of market you intend to model. This means quoting at the best price only gave the market maker a 50% chance of actually getting its order filled. This closed the feedback loop introduced in iteration 3, so y shifts the market maker’s quotes in response to inventory, and the logistic model then determines how that repositioning affects execution. Now the system links inventory risk, quoting strategy, and fill rate into one model, as opposed to these being independently parameterized because in real markets, they’re linked. The comparison holds the seed fixed so that the effect of fill mechanisms on wealth trajectory can be visualized across multiple models with different y values.

This project has proven to be a never ending mission to perfectly model the movement of a market. There are infinite connections between human behavior, market behavior, and order books’ logic, but there are some more important iterations I believe could strengthen this project. Queue position modeling would introduce execution priority, which would introduce a fill’s dependence on its position in the LOB. This would simulate the real-world competition between liquidity providers and the uncertainty of being filled when quoting at the same price level. Hawkes processes would allow order arrivals to become self-exciting rather than independent, capturing the often clustered trade periods experienced in real markets. This would artificially create volatility regimes and feedback between order flow and price movements. And finally, incorporating adverse selection models informed traders, meaning some order flow predicts future price changes. This allows the market maker to incur losses when providing liquidity against informed flow, reflecting a major real-world trading risk. This project is something I intend to continue iterating on, and as I learn more about discrete time finance, hope to make into something that can be applicable in real world trading strategy. Any comments or notes on this project would be greatly appreciated, very open to forks or code edit requests or whatever they’re called, I’m not familiar with the GitHub lingo.

Cheers!
